[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How can we hack our
history to change our future?
So I'm going to start you
with a quote from Socrates.
He said, "The secret of change
is to focus all of your energy
not on fighting the old,
but on building the new."
So our eyes are set
towards the future
and not focused on all
the obstacles of the past.
We've been told
by modern science
that the brain that
you have at birth
is going to be very similar
to the brain you have
when you die.
At a certain age, it
stops building itself
new brain cells
stop being created,
and if you have an issue
or an injury in your brain,
it's permanent.
So we've been told
this for decades,
and we've believed it--
up until now.
Now under the new paradigm, the
new science of neuroplasticity.
Neuroplasticity is the
ability for your brain
to change its structure,
its neuronal connectivity.
And the reason why
this is beautiful,
by changing your
brain, by hacking
into that process
of neuroplasticity,
we can literally have
a brand new brain
that serves us in
the way that we wish
to move forward in our lives.
Rather than taking all the
baggage with us from our past,
we can change, we
can move forward,
we can be a brand new human.
So let's take a look at the
history of neuroplasticity.
A German physiologist,
Friedrich Goltz, in the 1800s
did a hemispherectomy on a dog.
Now a hemispherectomy is
removing an entire hemisphere
of the brain.
Half of the brain.
What he noticed is,
when the dog recovered,
that dog was able to
play amongst other dogs.
It almost seemed as if there
was nothing wrong with that dog.
So let me get this straight--
if you have half a phone,
you have no functionality.
Half a car, half a
computer, half a camera,
you have no functionality to it.
But if you have
half a brain, you
can get along in this world
almost exactly the same?
John Freeman at Johns
Hopkins University.
He's a neuroscientist
that saw many
of these cases of
hemispherectomies,
and he's quoted as saying,
"One was a champion
bowler of her class,
one was a champion chess
master of his state,
and others are
in college doing very nicely."
This boggles the
mind to think about.
That even after having
half the brain removed,
you can still go to
college, do well,
become a chess master,
even a champion bowler.
But injury is not required for
neuroplasticity to spark up.
And we will see in this series,
it steps away from the future.
That even people who
have not incurred damage
still have these
amazing gifts that
can happen inside their brain.
>> I have 377,149,515,625.
>> Rudiger Gamm isn't autistic,
but he has savant syndrome,
which has given him the
opportunity to show his
extraordinary capacities
in calculus on television.
To try to understand
Rudiger's method,
researchers have used a
very efficient technique
of neuroimaging.
Positron emission tomography.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Thanks to
radioactive markers,
we can visualize the cerebral
zones that are activated when
Rudiger does complicated
calculations mentally.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Now, let's do the same
experiment with this young
guinea pig, who isn't a
whiz at math like Rudiger.
So, where's the difference?
The analysis of
the results shows
that Rudiger uses an
additional memory space--
his long-term memory.
On the contrary, when
we do a calculation,
we store the intermediate
results of our calculations
in a small memory
space used for work
called our short-term memory.
Thus, Rudiger benefits
from a bigger mental pocket
that has greater storage
capacities, which
benefits his accomplishments.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> If you prefer, the mental
calculator has the same brain
as us anatomically, but
he uses it differently.
>> So I think one of the keys in
Rudiger Gamm's case is the fact
that he has the same brain,
the same hardware as any of us,
but he uses it
slightly differently.
Let's take a look at
some memory games,
things that we've been told
can boost our brainpower,
boost our memory and our
cognitive performance.
Dr. Michael Merzenich
said the way
to actually use these games in a
way that will boost your memory
and boost your
cognitive performance
is by upping the
challenge level.
So if your skill
level is here, simply
by boosting the
challenge level, you'll
actually begin prompting
neuroplasticity.
So giving yourself a timeline
in a crossword puzzle,
or trying a challenge that's a
little bit outside your comfort
zone, this actually
allows for the brain
to strive for something more.
Professor Don Vaughn from
UCLA, along with many
of his colleagues, created
an app called ChatterBaby.
This app was created for
deaf and blind parents
that are having trouble
connecting with their child.
So what they found was
that with acute training,
the deaf parents that could not
hear the nuances of their baby
crying that gave very rich
and valuable information
with what's wrong
with their child
or what their child
needs, they were
able to focus on what
they were seeing--
the body language, the
facial expressions.
And in their minds'
ear, if you will,
they were able to hear the
sound that they were missing.
Conversely, the
blind parents that
weren't able to see
the body language
but were able to hear
just fine were then
able to tap into what
they were hearing,
all the nuances
of it-- the cries,
the chatter that
their baby displayed.
And in all those
nuances, it would
translate into the visual
cortex of this blind parent.
So in the mind's eye, they were
able to see, and in this way,
they were able to connect
with their child in much
more of a beautiful way.
This is just one of the many
examples of how neuroplasticity
is truly remarkable in
allowing for certain impulses
to translate themselves into
what's missing in our lives.
What are the actual conditions
that prompt our brain
to restructure itself?
The first one is attention.
The second one is the
duration of your attention
and the intensity of it.
How deeply you're
actually focusing on what
you're looking to focus on.
The next one is
constraint and immersion.
Meaning if you can
constrain your focus
and leave out all the
distractions, all the things
that pull your attention
away, constrain your attention
into what you would
like to focus on
and immerse yourself in
that one little aspect,
then this is a condition
for neuroplasticity as well.
And the final two are
imitation and visualization.
Let's actually give
another example.
Imagine you go to the movies,
because you want simply
to be entertained.
You don't want to put
any brainpower in,
you just want to
sit in that seat
and be entertained by the movie.
But you're sitting
right next to somebody
who has come to watch
the movie to study
the craft of screenwriting.
So they're sitting there from
the same vantage point watching
the same exact movie,
but their brain
will prompt neuroplasticity
because they choose to learn.
They focus their attention
on very unique things
that they would like to learn.
So they set the framework
for neuroplasticity,
whereas you sitting
in the very next seat
just wish to be entertained,
so no neuroplasticity pops up.
So now I want to
show you an episode
of the "Science of Happiness--
New Neural Pathways
with Ashleigh Sergeant."
>> Your type of mind, my type
of mind used to be able to hide
behind that idea of oh, it's
too late in my life to start
meditating, or some of my
thought patterns are just
so deep, there's no way
I'm going to change them.
And actually science used to
kind of go along with that,
with this idea that after
actually like nine years
of age, it's kind of downhill.
[LAUGHS] And we're actually
degenerating in the brain.
But neuroscience now,
and particularly a branch
of neuroscience called
neuroplasticity,
shows us that actually,
new neural pathways
are able to be created
throughout our entire life.
That being said, it's
like what we're actually
able to do is to create
new patterns and new habits
of thinking of the way that the
brain works whenever we want.
>> Growing new brain cells is
a process called neurogenesis.
And this is very
important to us,
because many of the
modern lifestyle
stressors, the
pollutants, and the things
that we engage in on a daily
basis damage our brain cells.
So if we are now realizing that
we are able to create new brain
cells, that there are
ways that we can actually
generate this new
neural structure,
then we have the power
to completely rebuild
and completely
restructure our brain
to better serve us moving
forward on this path.
We know now that novel and
functional forms of movement
prompts neuroplasticity and
neurogenesis later in years,
no matter how old you are.
We know that foods like
blueberries and chocolate,
that high-intensity exercise
and aerobic exercise
can prompt neuroplasticity
and neurogenesis.
There are more, but let's just
stick with functional movement
and novel movement.
Functional means the
biomechanical way
that your body was designed
to move with nature.
Novel means new-- unique ways
that your body can move--
perhaps was even designed
to move, but it doesn't.
And by doing these
things, that's
when we start to notice
this pickup of neurogenesis
and neuroplasticity
inside the brain.
These things actually
strengthen the mind-body maps.
And what a mind-body
map is is your mind
being able to know exactly where
your body is in space and time
and feel confident that
if it gives a command,
your body can execute
that perfectly.
But to be fair, I want to
balance the conversation here.
Greg Downey, he's
an anthropologist
and the co-author of a popular
blog, "Neuroanthropology."
He says, "I've seen
tremendous exaggeration.
People are so excited
about neuroplasticity
that they talk themselves
into believing anything."
So yes, Greg is very right.
This is a natural
human condition for us
to exaggerate, to extrapolate
meaning from what we hear.
To go beyond what the
data is showing us.
And this must be
irritating to some people.
However, I believe this
is also one of our gifts--
the ability to
speculate, the ability
to go beyond what science
has proven that we can do.
Because we know that
what they have measured
is only what we've
done in the past,
but it does not determine
where we can go in the future.
So one example of this is Major
General Albert Stubblebine.
You may have seen the movie
"Men Who Stare at Goats."
The very first scene is this man
trying to walk through a wall
and smacking his face
against the brick wall.
He believed that if he
held that intention,
that he could pass through
that wall unscathed,
that he could dematerialize
and rematerialize
on the other side, that that
intention and that belief
would be enough.
It wasn't.
He was wrong.
He failed.
So to Greg Downey's
point, yes, this
may be overzealousness and
speculation and exaggeration.
However, does that mean that
what Albert Stubblebine was
trying to do was not realistic?
Impossible?
Or does it simply mean he
didn't do it correctly?
Something to ponder.
So let's just stick
with what science
is telling us right now so
we don't exaggerate too much.
There was a study out
of Northwestern Medicine
and the University of
Colorado School of Medicine
that found that high-intensity
exercise for Parkinson's
patients will actually halt the
progression of their symptoms.
There's also another
study from Dr. Ambra Bisio
from the Department of
Experimental Medicine
at the University of Genoa.
And she says Alzheimer's
patients are still
able to voluntarily imitate
the movement of an object
as well as that
of a human being.
If this ability
is still in place,
a patient could
relearn how to perform
actions that have become
difficult due to the disease.
So we're back to that word--
imitation.
That's one of those conditions
for neuroplasticity,
to be able to use the body
to imitate the movement
of an object or another person
is actually a way of reversing
some of the symptoms
of Alzheimer's.
Now Parkinson's and Alzheimer's
are neurodegenerative diseases.
So this is very interesting
that the active use of our body
can halt the symptomology of
a neurodegenerative disease.
This is why I like to use
a quote from Robert Brault
that I think sums
this up perfectly.
"There are people who live their
entire lives on their default
settings, never realizing
that you can customize."
And you truly can customize your
brain and customize your life.
So now let's look at
one more condition
that gives rise to
neuroplasticity,
the condition of visualization.
Let's hear from the expert
David Hamilton with "On the Road
with Lilou."
>> So what I often do is just
call it a piece of research.
So for example, if I'm
suggesting to people
that what they
visualize can have
a physical impact in the
body, now mentioning that
would sound preposterous.
How can I visualize
myself and change my body?
Well, here's one part of
many parts of evidence.
Harvard University that
does a fantastic study
where they asked volunteers
to play a simple combination
of piano notes.
They literately went,
sat in front of a piano
and went [MIMICKING MUSIC NOTES]
repetitively for two hours,
just five-finger muscle
combination repetitively
for two hours on five
consecutive days.
So Monday through Friday.
And they had their
brain imaged every day.
And what the scientists found is
the area of the brain connected
to the finger muscles began
to grow like a muscle.
And by the fourth day, it
was substantially larger
than it was on the
Monday, and that's
a term known as neuroplasticity.
But where it gets
really interesting
is a separate group
of volunteers,
instead of physically
playing the piano notes--
[MIMICKING MUSIC NOTES],, they
had to do it in their heads.
So they had to just--
without moving their muscles,
they had to imagine going
[MIMICKING MUSIC NOTES]
repetitively for the same
two hours for the same five
consecutive days,
Monday through Friday.
And they had their brain imaged
every day, and incredibly,
their brain began to
grow like a muscle,
and the area connected
to the finger muscles.
And if you compare it
on the Friday the brain
images for those who physically
played the notes with those who
imagined playing the notes, put
the slates beside each other,
you couldn't tell
the difference.
So in other words,
the brain was not
distinguishing between
who actually played piano
and who was imagining it.
So that's a very, very
powerful piece of evidence
that shows that we have
physically shaped the structure
of the brain by
imagining something,
and if we can do that,
what else can we do?
>> What I love about what David
Hamilton says there is that
the way you think literally
can restructure your brain.
But now let's take
it a step further.
We're just talking about
so far neurohacking
our individual mind the
brain mind, if you will.
That's the mini-mind, but
what about the super mind?
The mind that exists
in between many of us?
There's a lot of science
that's coming out nowadays
that shows that our brain may
be a transmitter and a receiver
for intelligence that
exists outside of our brain.
And I believe that this is
what all those anxious movement
modalities of Tai
Chi, Falun Gong, yoga,
shamanic dance, the Whirling
Dervishes, and so on and so
forth, all of these
movement modalities,
they're linking the
body with the mind,
they're silencing the mind
and linking the breath
with very unique movements, and
they do this over much time.
And this practice is
not simply to help
with their Parkinson's or
their Alzheimer's, this
is a spiritual practice.
So there's so much to be said
about these ancient movement
modalities and what they have
to say about our true potential
and how we can reshape
the mind, but go
beyond the individual
mind into the super mind.
So let's take a look at an
episode of "Psychedelica,"
a Gaia original series.
>> The remaining indigenous
of the original tribes carry
on the belief that
regardless of the skepticism,
the prophecy is in motion, and
a revival of shamanic traditions
and interest among even the
Western world is growing.
And signs of this
shift in consciousness
may also be appearing in pop
cultural trends returning
to nature-based activities.
Exercise rituals of
just a few decades ago
are being revisioned
in a natural setting,
linking the body and mind
back to these spaces.
Dietary trends are looking
back into ancestral traditions
that pre-date colonial
grain-based diets.
Workshops are popping up around
the world with catchwords
like re-wilding, primal,
ancestral, and shamanic.
Could this be a
sign of the times?
That the innate
balancing intelligence
of the collective senses the
need for uniting with our roots
once more?
And in this way, the
real shamanic medicine
was understood to
be relationships
and the strength of the group--
integrate remembering of
the deeper purposes of life.
>> What this is really showing
us is that our community is
a greater aspect of our mind.
That we tap into it, we
influence one another.
We connect almost
neurologically with the people
in our community.
To such a degree that
Jim Rohn even said,
"You are the average
of the five people
you spend the most
amount of time with."
This may not be
accurate to the number,
but think of what
this is implying.
That the people you spend
the most amount of time with
are like neurons that fire
together and wire together.
If you truly are
like the people you
spend the most amount of time
with, then think about it.
Who are you spending the most
amount of your time with?
And remember that we in
our greater community,
in our society, whether
we truly meet everybody
in this community or not, we
are many people with one voice.
This has been happening
since the beginning of time,
banding together into these
social groups and cliques,
and influencing the
way we behave based
upon the people around us.
And then it grew
to entire nations.
So in nations, there was
national pride and groupthink
in such ways that if a nation
agreed with another nation,
they could become allies.
If they disagreed,
it would mean war.
And now, with a mass
homogenization, as I call it,
of our mind, what
we're seeing now
is that industry even
supersedes all of the loyalties
to specific countries
and nations.
That around the world,
these industries
are banding together many
people, many actions,
but one voice and one direction.
But that's just national,
that's just humans.
How far does our mind truly go?
How all-encompassing is it?
If we take a look
at the universe,
could we see evidence that the
mind exists out there as well?
So I invite you to take
a look at this image.
On the left you will
see an image of neurons.
And these neurons are
firing and wiring together,
and you can see that there
is a very unique way that it
looks as they're connected.
Now take a look at the
image on the right.
It looks fairly
similar, doesn't it?
But to see the
image on the right,
you would have to use a
telescope, not a microscope,
because what you're
looking at are galaxies,
and those connections between
the galaxies are very real.
Now you can't see them
with the naked eye.
These are enhanced photos.
So what it's actually showing
is that these connections
have been found through
gravitational arc photography,
meaning that in the
naked darkness of space,
astronomers were noticing
that light was bending itself
towards these invisible
channels between galaxies.
Then they came to find
that these are ionic plasma
channels, meaning there is ionic
organized information-sharing
between galaxies.
So I invite you to ponder
what this might mean.
If there is information
sharing between galaxies,
what does this mean for us?
Can we access this information?
Are we a part of
this super mind?
And can we hack it?
Is there a form of
neuroplasticity or neurogenesis
that happens at
the galactic level?
These are important questions
to ask, because we do not
want to limit where
we think we can
go with all of our potential.
So there's two
types of mindsets.
One is a fixed
mindset, and the other
is a growth mindset,
and most all of us
fit into one or the other.
A fixed mindset sees a problem.
And if that problem is
bigger than anything
that we've overcome
before, then we quit.
We dop not believe
we can overcome it.
We do not look for challenges,
we do not rise to the occasion.
And this is distinctly different
than the growth mindset.
The growth mindset
is activated, engaged
by challenges there
is no challenge that
seems too big for us.
Maybe too big for us right
now, but the growth mindset
knows we can overcome
any challenge.
And we love rising
to that occasion
because we love learning.
And not just about the outside
world, but what we can truly do
and what we're capable
of in this life.
Now I'll leave you
with a challenge
so you can actually employ
what I'm talking about
and feel the changes
in your life.
There are three components
to this challenge,
and I want you to do
them every single day.
The first, try some
crossword puzzles,
some Sudoku, some
video games, but I
want you to boost the challenge
level so your skill level has
to rise to the occasion.
You may not be very good at
it, but what you're doing
is you're calling yourself
to a higher standard.
Secondly, I want you to
engage in at least 20 minutes
of high-intensity exercise
or aerobic exercise,
because we know that this
prompts neuroplasticity
and neurogenesis.
And every single
day I would like
you to add two
things to your diet--
blueberries and chocolate.
Yes, chocolate.
These two things also on
their own prompt neurogenesis
and neuroplasticity.
And if you do this every
day until I see you next,
you will have effectively
neurohacked your mind
and tasted the immense
power of the super mind.
So I hope to see you next
time around on "Limitless."
[MUSIC PLAYING]